Recipient eip (#2771)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-2771.md

---
eip: 2771
title: Secure Protocol for Native Meta Transactions
author: Ronan Sandford (@wighawag), Liraz Siri (@lirazsiri),  Dror Tirosh (@drortirosh), Yoav Weiss (@yoavw), Alex Forshtat (@forshtat), Hadrien Croubois (@Amxx), Tomar Sachin (@tomarsachin2271), Patrick McCorry (@stonecoldpat), Nicolas Venturo (@nventuro), Fabian Vogelsteller (@frozeman) 
discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/2771
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2020-07-01

> requires: 2770

Reviewer: Why does this require 2770?  I don't see any references to 2770 anywhere else in this EIP.

Reviewer: Also, we can't merge this until #2770 is merged, so will have to wait a bit.

Reviewer 2: The dependency on 2770 was a mistake. Removed!

---
eip: 2771
title: Secure Protocol for Native Meta Transactions
author: Ronan Sandford (@wighawag), Liraz Siri (@lirazsiri),  Dror Tirosh (@drortirosh), Yoav Weiss (@yoavw), Alex Forshtat (@forshtat), Hadrien Croubois (@Amxx), Tomar Sachin (@tomarsachin2271), Patrick McCorry (@stonecoldpat), Nicolas Venturo (@nventuro), Fabian Vogelsteller (@frozeman) 
discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/2771
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2020-07-01
---

## Simple Summary

> We define a minimal contract-level protocol for receiving a meta transaction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A minimal contract-level protocol for receiving a meta transaction
```

> We define a minimal contract-level protocol for receiving a meta transaction
> through a trusted forwarder contract that helps a recipient contract avoid
> confusing the address of the transaction relayer with the address of the
> transaction signer. 

Reviewer: You probably should shorten this up a bit and leave some content for the abstract.  😄 
```suggestion
A contract interface for receiving meta transactions through a trusted forwarder.
```

Internally, the **Recipient** MUST then accept a request from forwarder

That function can be called on-chain and as such gas restriction needs to be
put in place. 

A Gas limit of 10k is enough for making  the decision either inside the
contract, or delegating it to another contract and doing some memory access
calculations, like querying a mapping.

###  Recipient example 

```solidity
contract RecipientExample {

    function purchaseItem(uint256 itemId) external {
        address sender = _msgSender();
        ... perform the purchase for sender
    }

    address immutable _trustedForwarder;
    constructor(address trustedForwarder) internal {
        _trustedForwarder = trustedForwarder;
    }

    function isTrustedForwarder(address forwarder) external returns(bool) {
        return forwarder == _trustedForwarder;
    }

    function _msgSender() internal view returns (address payable signer) {
        signer = msg.sender;
        if (isTrustedForwarder(signer)) {
            bytes memory data = msg.data;
            uint256 length = msg.data.length;
            assembly { signer := mload(add(data, length))) }
        }    
    }

}
```

> 
> ## Security Considerations

Reviewer: Missing Rationale section.  This is where you indicate why you made specific decisions you did in the specification.  Like why choose name X over name Y, why fire events at point A instead of point B, etc.
```suggestion
## Rationale
TBD

## Security Considerations
```

Reviewer 2: Added Rationale section.

That function can be called on-chain and as such gas restriction needs to be
put in place. 

A Gas limit of 10k is enough for making  the decision either inside the
contract, or delegating it to another contract and doing some memory access
calculations, like querying a mapping.

###  Recipient example 

```solidity
contract RecipientExample {

    function purchaseItem(uint256 itemId) external {
        address sender = _msgSender();
        ... perform the purchase for sender
    }

    address immutable _trustedForwarder;
    constructor(address trustedForwarder) internal {
        _trustedForwarder = trustedForwarder;
    }

    function isTrustedForwarder(address forwarder) external returns(bool) {
        return forwarder == _trustedForwarder;
    }

    function _msgSender() internal view returns (address payable signer) {
        signer = msg.sender;
        if (isTrustedForwarder(signer)) {
            bytes memory data = msg.data;
            uint256 length = msg.data.length;
            assembly { signer := mload(add(data, length))) }
        }    
    }

}
```

## Rationale

* Without support for meta transactions in the recipient contract, an externally owned 

>   account can not use meta transactions to interact with the receipient contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
account can not use meta transactions to interact with the recipient contract.
```

Reviewer 2: fixed typo

---
eip: 2771
title: Secure Protocol for Native Meta Transactions
author: Ronan Sandford (@wighawag), Liraz Siri (@lirazsiri),  Dror Tirosh (@drortirosh), Yoav Weiss (@yoavw), Alex Forshtat (@forshtat), Hadrien Croubois (@Amxx), Tomar Sachin (@tomarsachin2271), Patrick McCorry (@stonecoldpat), Nicolas Venturo (@nventuro), Fabian Vogelsteller (@frozeman) 

> discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/2771

Reviewer 3: @MicahZoltu EIP-1 states that pull requests cannot be used as discussion URLs. I'm not here to judge whether that is a good or bad idea, but this draft was merged against EIP-1 rules.

@lightclient is that enforced in eipv?

Reviewer: Missed that, good catch!  Definitely something that would be nice for the bot to catch since it is easy to miss (valid Issue URL looks very similar to invalid PR URL).

Reviewer 4: I have listed this as a [requirement](https://github.com/lightclient/eipv#requirements) for `eipv`, but it has not been implemented yet.

Reviewer 2: I issued another PR to redirect the discussion to the following Ethereum Magicians post:

https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-2771-secure-protocol-for-native-meta-transactions/4488

coming from the **Gas Relay** and not the **Transaction Signer**. A secure
protocol for a contract to accept meta transactions needs to prevent the **Gas
Relay** from forging, modifying or duplicating requests by the **Transaction
Signer**.

## Specification

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt)).

Here is an example flow:

![Example flow](../assets/eip-2771/example-flow.png)

*   **Transaction Signer** - entity that signs & sends to request to **Gas
    Relay**
*   **Gas Relay** - receives a signed request off-chain from **Transaction
    Signer** and pays gas to turn it into a valid transaction that goes through
**Trusted Forwarder**
*   **Trusted Forwarder** - a contract that is trusted by the `Recipient` to
    correctly verify the signature and nonce before forwarding the request from
**Transaction Signer**
*   **Recipient** - a contract that can securely accept meta-transactions
    through a **Trusted Forwarder** by being compliant with this standard.

> 

Reviewer 3: It seems that the specification section does not explicitly state the specification: the sender address is appended to the end of the calldata.

It is only explained under the "extracting" and "example" subsections.

Reviewer 2: "The Trusted Forwarder is responsible for calling the Recipient contract and MUST append the address of the Transaction Signer (20 bytes of data) to the end of the call data."

Is it unclear? Would duplicating the above paragraph or parts of it help? Or are you suggesting to move it somewhere else? The specification section is divided into subsections for clarity and context. 

The rationale for having it below the "Extracting The Transaction Signer address" heading, is that explaining what needs to happen in terms extraction of the signer helps give additional context that may help explain why the signer was appended to the calldata.

Reviewer: The `Extracting The Transaction Signer Address` is a subsection of the `Specification` section, so I think it is fine there.

Reviewer: You may want to put the above definitions into a `### Definitions` subsection though, just to help with automated table of contents generation.

This is especially important for meta transactions to be supported at the Web3
wallet level. Such wallets may not necessarily know anything about the
**Recipient** contract users may wish to interact with.

As a **Recipient** could trust forwarders with different interfaces and
capabilities (e.g., transaction batching, different message signing formats),
we need to allow wallets to discover which Forwarder is trusted.

To provide this discovery mechanism a **Recipient** contract MUST implement
this function:

```solidity
function isTrustedForwarder(address forwarder) external returns(bool);
```

*  That function MUST return true if the forwarder is trusted by the
   Recipient.
*  That function MUST return false if the forwarder is not trusted.
*  That function MUST NOT throw a revert.

Internally, the **Recipient** MUST then accept a request from forwarder

That function can be called on-chain and as such gas restriction needs to be
put in place. 

A Gas limit of 10k is enough for making  the decision either inside the
contract, or delegating it to another contract and doing some memory access
calculations, like querying a mapping.

###  Recipient example 

```solidity

> contract RecipientExample {

Reviewer 3: There is no version pragma, which would be verify useful for anyone reading this standard in a few months/years.

Reviewer 2: There is a pragma in the linked implementation. I don't mind adding it to the example if you think it would be very useful, but I am worried that it will add a bit of unnecessary clutter and possibly confuse with regards to the compatibility of the code with earlier versions.

    function purchaseItem(uint256 itemId) external {
        address sender = _msgSender();

>         ... perform the purchase for sender

Reviewer 3: Seems to be invalid solidity code.

Reviewer 2: Yes, it is supposed to be **obviously** invalid. Unless we actually want to implement the logic for purchaseItem we have either invalid syntax or invalid semantics.

    }

    address immutable _trustedForwarder;
    constructor(address trustedForwarder) internal {
        _trustedForwarder = trustedForwarder;
    }

    function isTrustedForwarder(address forwarder) external returns(bool) {
        return forwarder == _trustedForwarder;
    }

    function _msgSender() internal view returns (address payable signer) {
        signer = msg.sender;

>         if (isTrustedForwarder(signer)) {

Reviewer 3: Since `isTrustedForwarder` is marked external, this expression here likely will create an external functional call to do the comparison. This is quite expensive. Probably you do not want to suggest this to your users.

Reviewer 2: We don't expect users to use the examples in the EIP as they are optimized for readability. We expect users to use a reference base class such as this one:

https://github.com/opengsn/forwarder/blob/master/contracts/BaseRelayRecipient.sol

            bytes memory data = msg.data;
            uint256 length = msg.data.length;

>             assembly { signer := mload(add(data, length))) }

Reviewer 3: It should be possible to use slicing on `msg.data` to avoid this mess.

Reviewer 2: How would you rewrite this for clarity? This is what this function looks like in the reference base class implementation:

    function _msgSender() internal override virtual view returns (address payable ret) {
        if (msg.data.length >= 24 && isTrustedForwarder(msg.sender)) {
            // At this point we know that the sender is a trusted forwarder,
            // so we trust that the last bytes of msg.data are the verified sender address.
            // extract sender address from the end of msg.data
            assembly {
                ret := shr(96,calldataload(sub(calldatasize(),20)))
            }
        } else {
            return msg.sender;
        }
    }
